1
Nguyen KA, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e052401. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052401
Open access 
Strategies prescribers and pharmacists 
use to identify and mitigate adverse 
drug reactions in inpatient and 
outpatient care: a cognitive task analysis 
at a US Veterans Affairs Medical Center
Khoa Anh Nguyen    ,1,2 Laura G Militello,3 Amanda Ifeachor,4 Karen J Arthur,5 
Peter A Glassman,6 Alan J Zillich,7 Michael Weiner,1,8 Alissa L Russ- Jara1,7
To cite: Nguyen KA, Militello LG, 
Ifeachor A, et al.  Strategies 
prescribers and pharmacists use 
to identify and mitigate adverse 
drug reactions in inpatient and 
outpatient care: a cognitive task 
analysis at a US Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center. BMJ Open 
2022;12:e052401. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2021-052401
 ► Prepublication history and 
additional supplemental material 
for this paper are available 
online. To view these files, 
please visit the journal online 
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ 
bmjopen-2021-052401).
Received 16 April 2021
Accepted 26 January 2022
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Khoa Anh Nguyen;  
 khoanguyen@ cop. ufl. edu
Original research
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2022. Re- use 
permitted under CC BY- NC. No 
commercial re- use. See rights 
and permissions. Published by 
BMJ.
ABSTRACT
Objective To develop a descriptive model of the cognitive 
processes used to identify and resolve adverse drug 
reactions (ADRs) from the perspective of healthcare 
providers in order to inform future informatics efforts
Setting Inpatient and outpatient care at a tertiary care US 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center.
Participants Physicians, nurse practitioners and 
pharmacists who report ADRs.
Outcomes Descriptive model and emerging themes from 
interviews.
Results We conducted critical decision method interviews 
with 10 physicians and 10 pharmacists. No nurse 
practitioners submitted ADR incidents. We generated a 
descriptive model of an ADR decision- making process and 
analysed emerging themes, categorised into four stages: 
detection of potential ADR, investigation of the problem’s 
cause, risk/benefit consideration, and plan, action and 
follow- up. Healthcare professionals (HCPs) relied on 
several confirmatory or disconfirmatory cues to detect and 
investigate potential ADRs. Evaluating risks and benefits 
of related medications played an essential role in HCPs' 
pursuits of solutions
Conclusions This study provides an illustrative model of 
how HCPs detect problems and make decisions regarding 
ADRs. The design of supporting technology for potential 
ADR problems should align with HCPs' real- world cognitive 
strategies, to assist fully in detecting and preventing ADRs 
for patients.
INTRODUCTION
Adverse drug events (ADEs) harm over 
1.5 million patients and cost over $500 million 
each year in USA.1 These concerning statistics 
prompted the US Office of Disease Preven-
tion and Health Promotion to develop a 
National Action Plan for Adverse Drug Event 
Prevention in 2014. 2 This plan called for 
actions, including developing health infor -
mation technology to promote best prac-
tices in prescribing, and in detecting cases of 
high risk for ADEs. 2 Many factors contribute 
to the high incidence of ADEs in the USA, 
including an increasing number of adverse 
drug reactions (ADRs), an ageing popula-
tion and a rising trend in polypharmacy. 3 
ADR, defined as an unintended response to 
a drug that occurs at normally used doses, 
is the most common type of ADE. 4 Health-
care professionals (HCPs) such as physicians 
and pharmacists are essential in preventing 
and managing ADRs because they directly 
prescribe drugs and provide clinical care. 
However, the processes that individual HCPs 
adopt to identify, treat and monitor ADRs are 
not well understood.
Healthcare systems leverage many different 
approaches to support HCPs in assessing 
and preventing ADRs, including systematic 
efforts to collect and review data to assess 
the risk of ADRs. 5–7 With advances in the 
development and implementation of elec-
tronic health records (EHRs), alert systems 
that help HCPs identify and prevent ADEs 
have become more feasible and promising. 
Indeed, automated computerised order 
checks, frequently resulting in drug alerts, 
Strengths and limitations of this study
 ► This is the first study to examine the cognitive pro-
cess that healthcare professionals (HCPs) use to de-
tect and investigate adverse drug reactions (ADRs).
 ► We used a critical decision method to construct a 
descriptive model.
 ► We only interviewed physicians and pharma-
cists regarding ADRs but not other HCPs such as 
nurse practitioners, registered nurses or physician 
assistants.
 ► We only examined incidents from a single large 
Veteran Affairs Medical Center and electronic health 
records system.
2
Nguyen KA, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e052401. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052401
Open access 
are often based on triggers such as the documentation of 
a patient’s allergies.8
While medication alert systems for allergies have 
been implemented regularly, alert systems with decision 
support to identify and resolve newly occurring ADRs are 
rarely found. In addition, many EHR alert systems have a 
technology- centric design that fails to take into account 
the HCPs' cognitive processes and workflow. 9–11 HCP 
decision- centred design, in contrast, focuses on HCPs' 
cognitive processes and key decisions, such as prescribing 
a drug, or choosing a drug regimen, as a core function 
of design.12 13 With a foundational understanding of the 
cognitive strategies that HCPs use to prevent and respond 
to ADRs in clinical practice, healthcare systems and EHR 
vendors can develop systemic interventions and technol-
ogies to help HCPs prevent and resolve ADRs. Recent 
studies emphasise that cognitive studies are needed to 
help understand HCPs' decision making 9 14  in order to 
develop more meaningful and effective clinical deci-
sion support. Therefore, the objective of this study was 
to develop a descriptive model of the cognitive processes 
used to identify and resolve ADRs from the perspective of 
HCPs in order to inform future informatics efforts.
METHODS
Study site and participant characteristics
This research is part of a larger study 15 16 conducted at 
a tertiary care Veterans Affairs Medical Center. Eligible 
HCPs were physicians, nurse practitioners, and pharma-
cists who prescribed medications, managed medications, 
or verified prescriptions in an inpatient or outpatient 
setting. We excluded medical and pharmacy residents, 
trainees, pharmacy technicians and those with a purely 
administrative role. We invited all remaining eligible 
HCPs at the study site to participate. Eligible HCPs were 
invited to participate via emails, flyers and follow- up via 
phone calls. All participants consented in written prior 
to the critical decision method (CDM) interviews. An 
extended version of the recruitment can be found from 
the method paper.15
Study design
The study procedure and data analysis are illustrated in 
four steps in figure 1.
Potential ADR incident capture
Participants, when encountering a potential ADR, were 
ask to complete an incident card, 15 which captured 
detailed information about the potential ADR incident, 
such as the type of ADR, suspected medication(s) and 
when the participant first became aware of the problem. 
Given that recall is often difficult for tasks and decisions 
that are made many times each day, 17 the incident card 
was designed to help capture an ADR event close to the 
time of the incident, before it was forgotten or ‘merged’ in 
memory with similar events. A similar approach of admin-
istering a small set of questions soon after an incident 
has been shown to increase accuracy of recall days later.18 
Subsequently, the incident card that HCPs submitted was 
used to assist with the CDM interviews if the incident was 
selected, as described below.
Incident selection
A research team, consisting of a physician, pharmacist 
and human factors expert, reviewed each incident card 
to determine eligibility for an interview. Incident cards 
were reviewed based on five criteria: incident was appro-
priately addressed, incident required great expertise or 
consideration, incident had potential to cause serious 
injury, incident was unique or challenging, or incident 
would be difficult for trainees to resolve alone.
Critical decision method
Selected incidents led to scheduling of follow- up CDM 
interviews with HCPs, to collect further details. 15 The 
CDM interview technique, often used as part of a cogni-
tive task analysis, is designed to capture detailed incident 
accounts from participants, including strategies, critical 
cues and contextual elements as experienced by the inter-
viewee.17 A human factors expert conducted pilot testing 
of the interview guide with three HCPs (two physicians, 
one pharmacist) to further refine interview questions 
prior to data collection. 15 Interviews were scheduled 
within 2–4 weeks of the incident date. One human factors 
scientist, trained in the CDM technique, conducted a 
60 min, semistructured CDM interview with each HCP. 
These interviews were structured in the following three 
phases:
1. Capture a brief summary of the incident: The inter -
viewer asked the participant to summarise the incident 
as it pertained to the ADR concern. If multiple eligible 
incidents were received from a participant, the inter -
viewer asked questions at the beginning of the inter -
view, to select the more challenging incident.
2. Construct an incident timeline: The interviewer asked 
participants probing questions, to reconstruct a high- 
Figure 1 Overview of the study procedure. Four main steps are shown in the illustration. ADR, adverse drug reaction.
3
Nguyen KA, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e052401. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052401
Open access
level time line of the incident. This time line was re-
corded and displayed on a whiteboard, visible to both 
the interviewer and HCP during the interview session. 
The time line helped the interviewer organise the inci-
dent in chronological order and provided a common 
point of reference for the rest of the interview.
3. Ask in- depth questions. The interviewer asked addition-
al questions to investigate the HCPs' decision- making 
process, and to identify cognitive cues used during the 
course of the incident. The interviewer then asked hy-
pothetical questions to gain further insights about the 
cognitive cues or strategies that the participant used to 
detect and respond to the ADR incident.
The incident time line was photographed. Interviews 
were audio- recorded and transcribed for analysis. The 
complete interview guide and a more detailed descrip-
tion of study methods is available elsewhere. 15 Examples 
of interview questions are below.
1. What caused you to be concerned about the medica-
tion for this patient?
2. In what ways did computerised alerts help you notice 
the right things and take action?
3. What tools/software/technology were used to help 
manage the medication conflict?
4. What, if any, documentation in the EHR helped you 
know what to do?
5. Under what circumstances, if any, would you have dis-
continued the medication for this patient, rather than 
reducing the dose?
Qualitative data analysis
Interview transcripts were independently analysed by 
a human factors engineer and a clinical pharmacist, to 
generate decision requirement tables for each incident. 
The decision requirements table is a representation 
commonly used to examine key information within and 
across incidents.13 Any discrepancies in table content were 
discussed by the analysts until they reached consensus. 19 
These decision requirements tables summarised each inci-
dent and examined key elements. Specifically, researchers 
identified key decision points inductively, and for each 
decision point, recorded several components, including 
cues, strategies, potential errors and any factors that made 
the decision difficult. (See online supplemental appendix 
A for a sample decision requirements table.)
Three analysts (human factors engineer, pharmacist 
researcher and cognitive psychologist) then used these 
tables to identify initial themes across four selected inci-
dents. Each analyst independently coded the problem 
detection aspect of each incident from those decision 
requirements tables, then met weekly to discuss whether 
the data supported the initial conception of the model, 
and whether the proposed codes adequately captured 
the incident. Refinements were made to the codebook, 
including merging codes and adding new ones, refining 
the definition of codes, and adding examples to the code-
book. When they completed this process for the first four 
incidents, they worked through the same process with the 
investigate the cause codes, followed by the codes for plans/
address/follow- up from the decision requirements tables.
After analysing the first four incidents, two of the 
analysts (pharmacist researcher and cognitive psychol-
ogist) independently analysed the remaining data in 
blocks of four incidents (two pharmacist cases and two 
physician cases), using the complete codebook. Each inci-
dent was discussed until consensus was reached. When a 
block of four random incidents had been analysed and 
discussed, the two analysts summarised any new insights 
and potential refinements to the codebook (ie, clarifying 
definitions, nesting or un- nesting codes to reflect the 
data more completely), in consultation with the human 
factors engineer. See online supplemental appendix B for 
the final codebook. Final consensus codes were entered 
into NVivo software (QSR international, V.10), to assist 
with data management and analysis.
Initial model development of ADR decision-making
Data from all sources were collected and analysed to 
develop the initial model of ADR decision- making. To 
develop the initial model of ADR decision- making, we 
conducted a card sort of clinicians’ key decision points 
identified in each ADR incident. Decision points from 
each of the decision requirement tables, such as ‘inves-
tigate the cause of the problem’, were written on indi-
vidual paper index cards. A multidisciplinary team of five 
researchers, including two human factors professionals, 
two pharmacists and one physician, individually sorted 
cards into meaningful groups based on their background 
and perspectives to collapse similar decision points across 
incidents into one decision point, then reviewed and 
discussed the terminology for each decision point until 
reaching consensus.
From these card sort results, two human factors profes-
sionals developed the initial model, and then reviewed 
and refined the model monthly with inputs from all 
research team members, including practising physicians 
and pharmacists. The model was intended to characterise 
the cognitive processes that HCPs in our study described 
as they were confronted with potential ADRs.
Patient and public involvement
No patient was involved. This study focused on HCPs. 
However, the results of this study on ADRs were important 
to improve patient safety in medication use.
RESULTS
Participants and ADRs reported
HCPs submitted a total of 35 ADR incident cards. We 
completed interviews with 10 physicians and 10 phar -
macists (table 1) regarding 20 incidents. No nurse prac-
titioners submitted ADR incident cards. Reasons for 
exclusion of the remaining 15 ADR incident cards include: 
no action needed for clinical care (1), low ratings from 
incident cards from reviewers (2), illegible handwriting 
4
Nguyen KA, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e052401. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052401
Open access 
(1), participant submitted multiple cases (11). Table 2 
provides a brief description of the incidents.
ADR decision-making model
The resulting ADR model (figure 2) outlines participants' 
cognitive processes when they detected and responded to 
potential ADRs. This model consists of four medication- 
related stages: problem detection, investigation of the 
problem’s cause, risk/benefit considerations, and plan, 
action and follow- up. Below, we organise results by the 
stages in this model. Emergent themes within each stage 
are underlined, and sample quotes from participants are 
presented in box 1. Additionally, we describe each of the 
four stages in the results sections below.
Stage 1. Detection of potential ADR
In this first stage, HCPs relied on cues that signalled an initial 
concern. Patient’s symptoms (reported) and signs (observed) 
were common cues to help HCPs recognise a potential 
ADR. Additionally, abnormal lab values reported within the 
EHR can also help HCPs detect the problem. Furthermore, 
HCPs reviewed medication characteristics to sense poten-
tial ADRs. Common characteristics of ADR detection were 
either a new medication that was recently prescribed or started 
by the patient, or a medication that is commonly known to cause 
the ADR symptoms that the patient is experiencing. Usual causes of 
ADR symptoms were often recognised by HCPs from clinical 
experience. Finally, HCPs sometimes detected a potential 
ADR based on information (eg, tip- off) from another healthcare 
professional or the patient themselves.
Stage 2. Investigate the cause of incident
After detecting the problem, HCPs started to investigate 
the potential cause. This stage involved information that 
prompted HCPs to investigate, and their strategies for investi-
gating. For each specific reason to investigate, HCPs used 
a distinct, corresponding strategy, such as interviewing a 
patient who reported a certain symptom, or searching in 
drug references if the HCP suspected that a drug caused 
the sign or symptom. HCPs also examined confirmatory and 
disconfirmatory cues, to validate the connection between 
ADR concerns and their suspected medications.
When investigating the connection between an ADR and a 
possible problematic medication, HCPs searched for certain 
confirmatory cues. These were cues that helped providers to 
conclude that the medication was the likely cause of the 
ADR. Likewise, HCPs also looked for ‘disconfirmatory cues’ 
that suggested that the suspected medication was not causing 
an ADR (see box 1 for examples of confirmatory and discon-
firmatory cues). HCPs often reviewed the disconfirmatory 
cues through clinical references such as those provided by 
UpToDate, Micromedex and Lexicomp.
HCPs not only searched for documented and avail-
able clinical information but also looked for factors that 
were absent, to confirm or reject the connection between 
the ADR concern and the suspected medication. This is 
known as negative cue. An example includes medications 
that commonly cause the problem but were not part of 
the patients' medication regimen.
Stage 3. Risk and benefit considerations
When the cues indicated the occurrence of an ADR, 
HCPs often considered the risks and benefits associated 
with continuing or stopping the suspected medication. As 
part of this solution- seeking activity, HCPs often consid-
ered whether available alternative treatments could alle-
viate the ADR. They also weighed the risks and benefits 
associated with such alternatives. While weighing risks 
and benefits is an essential element of medical decision- 
making, our study found several components that HCPs 
also take into consideration. These components include:
Severity of side effects
HCPs often evaluated the severity of the current side 
effects, and the patient’s willingness to tolerate them. The 
HCP chose to continue the medication, but educated 
the patient about potential problems, and suggested 
increased monitoring (eg, follow- up by nursing staff or 
more frequent patient appointments). In contrast, if the 
side effects were more severe, the HCP sought alternative 
medications or treatment.
Anticipated benefits
If the treatment benefits of the medication were expected 
to outweigh the risk for the patient, the HCPs tended to 
continue the medication.
Fostering patient adherence
When investigating options for addressing and solving an 
ADR, the HCPs also incorporated the patient’s feedback 
Table 1 Characteristics of participants (n=20) who were Interviewed regarding an ADR incident
Characteristic Physicians (n=10) Pharmacists (n=10) All participants (n=20)
Gender: female, n (%) 7 (70) 6 (60) 13 (65)
Age, median, (range) 42 (34–60) 36 (29–45) 38.5 (29–60)
Veterans Affairs experience, median, (range) 10 (3.5–26) 7.5 (2–13.5) 9 (2–26)
Setting of incident
  Inpatient 0 4* 4
  Outpatient 10 6 16
*One pharmacist had both inpatient/outpatient role.
ADR, adverse drug reaction.
5
Nguyen KA, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e052401. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052401
Open access
and the likelihood that the patient will abandon treatment 
with the medication in question. Rather than sequentially 
trying a series of closely related medications (medications 
in the same class) in hopes that one will have the desired 
benefits without the adverse reaction, the HCP sometimes 
switched to a different class of medication therapy to help 
alleviate the patient’s concern.
Which risk is greater?
In some cases, HCPs framed the problem in terms of which 
risk was greater: stopping the medication, or experiencing 
the ADR. Conversely, at times they assessed which benefit 
was greater. This happened most often for patients with 
particularly challenging health conditions, such as HIV or 
multiple chronic comorbidities. In these cases, the patient 
may be taking a medication that has benefits for managing 
a chronic condition (eg, treating HIV), but stopping the 
medication may have benefits for mitigating ADR.
Stage 4. Plan, action and follow-up
The last stage of this decision- making model includes 
planning, selecting actions and follow- up with patients. 
Table 2 ADR incidents (n=20) selected for interviews
Case ID Potential ADR incident Medication(s) of concern
Action(s) taken by the 
participant
A.Incidents reported by physicians
#1 Patient complained of chest muscle spasms Duloxetine (Cymbalta) Switched to escitalopram
#2 Patient reported skin irritation on dorsum 
of feet
Capsaicin, gabapentin (two separate 
medications)
Stopped capsaicin, increased 
dose of gabapentin
#3 Patient reported trouble breathing Venlafaxine (Effexor) Stopped Effexor for 3 days
Started Vistaril (take as needed)
#4 Patient reported difficulty swallowing Suboxone Switched from suboxone 
sublingual to film strip
#5 Patient reported itching Dorzolamide Switched to latanoprost
#6 Patient reported muscle aches and had 
‘swollen eyes’
Emtricitabine/rilprivirine/tenofovir 
(Complera)
Switched from Complera to 
patient’s previous HIV regimen
#7 Elevated AST and ALT HIV medications Held HIV meds while treating 
hepatitis C
#8 HCP reported that patient had a history of 
kidney stones
Topiramate Advised the medical resident 
to taper and then discontinue 
topiramate
#9 Patient reported swelling, angio- oedema Hydrochlorothiazide/ lisinopril Discontinued lisinopril
#10 Elevated haemoglobin Testosterone Recommended PCP decrease or 
stop testosterone
B.Incidents reported by pharmacists
#1 Patient reported chest tenderness Spironolactone Switched from spironolactone to 
eplerenone
#2 Patient reported nightmares Varenicline Stopped varenicline, prescribed 
nicotine patch
#3 Thrombocytopenia Heparin Stopped heparin, transitioned 
from bivalirudin to rivaroxaban
#4 Patient reported chest pain Montelukast Stopped montelukast
#5 Patient had low blood pressure Doxazosin Contacted PCP and suggested 
stopping doxazosin
#6 Patient reported rash Piperacillin +tazobactam Switched to clindamycin
#7 Patient reported chest pain Abiraterone Reaffirmed to the patient that it is 
not a heart attack
Continued abiraterone for cancer 
treatment
#8 Patient reported diarrhoea Atorvastatin Switched to simvastatin
#9 Orthostatic hypotension Tamsulosin Recommended the rounding team 
stop tamsulosin
#10 Electronic health record alerted the 
participant about a sulfa allergy
Furosemide (new order) Advised the nurse practitioner that 
furosemide can be started
ADR, adverse drug reaction; ALT, alamine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; HCP , healthcare professional; PCP , 
primary care provider.
6
Nguyen KA, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e052401. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052401
Open access 
Based primarily on information collected stages 2 and 3, 
HCPs would determine appropriate plans and actions to 
address the problem. The three main actions in response 
to incidents in our study included changes to medication 
management, patient counselling, and follow- up appoint-
ments and monitoring. Changes to medications included 
stopping the offending medication, temporarily placing 
the medication on hold until the ADR was alleviated, 
changing the drug to one that is unlikely to cause the 
ADR or continuing the medication if its perceived bene-
fits outweigh risks.
Figure 2 Adverse drug reaction (ADR) decision- making 
model. the model has four stages.
Box 1 Main themes and quotes from participants
1.Detection of potential adverse drug reaction (ADR)
HCP detected potential ADR based on symptoms and signs
Patient called ((the)) pharmacy ((and)) said ((that)) after only 3 capsules 
of Cymbalta, the patient had muscle spasms and chest muscle spasms. 
Physician #1
A new medication or a medication that is already known to com-
monly cause the ADR symptoms
I asked the patient if he was taking the atorvastatin. Patient ((said)) ‘Yes, 
and (I) have had a lot of diarrheadiarrhoea since starting the medica-
tion’. Pharmacist #8
Information from another healthcare professional (HCP)
I got a view alert ((notification in my EHR inbox)), so I think ((the patient)) 
called the pharmacy and then they sent me a triage note with a box 
checked ((for)) adverse reaction. Physician #1
2.Investigate the cause of the problem
Reasons and strategies for investigating
((Participant)) interviewed a patient and asked follow- up questions 
((including)): having trouble breathing, sweating? when did the burning 
sensation start? Pharmacist #7
Confirmatory cues
Via phone call, ((the)) patient reported chest pain and muscle spasms. 
These ((symptoms)) occurred within the first 15 minutes min of taking 
((the medication)) ((Cymbalta)). Symptoms consistently happened within 
15 min for each of the three doses. ((Confirming that these symptoms 
were from taking Cymbalta.)) Physician #1
Disconfirmatory cue
Before starting Cymbalta ((the suspected medication)), the patient had 
reported muscle spasms/muscle cramps all over as part of a general 
pain syndrome. Physician #1
Negative cue (ie, information that is absent)
I rechecked (AST/ALT) on the end of October… and they were ((about)) 
the same ((as before)). The AST was 204 and ALT was 434…. Since ((it)) 
was about the same, liver function issues ((were)) NOT due to patient 
drinking. ‘I was hoping maybe ((the cause was)) was drinking ((which is 
easier to address than an ADR)).’ Physician #7
3.Risk and benefit considerations
Severity of side effects
Patient ((is)) tolerating the pain, not doing anything to compensate. Pain 
((is)) not effecting ((sic)) patient’s behaviour (in the context of chemo-
therapy, the potential benefits are very high). Pharmacist #7
Anticipated benefits
Furosemide ((if taken)) will take fluid off patient’s lungs ((patient had 
sulfa allergy)). Pharmacist #10
Encouraging patient adherence
So if you try several ones ((statins)), eventually sometimes patients are 
like: ‘I’m not doing this anymore.’ So I didn’t want to put him on some-
thing that had a decent risk and run the risk that he would have a 
problem and refuse statins down the line. Pharmacist #8
Which risk is greater?
((I need to)) make sure that the risk of anticoagulating her ((with hep-
arin)) was not greater than the risk of having this aortic dissection 
((bleeding risk)). Pharmacist #3
4.Plan, action and follow- up
Stop/put on hold/ adjust the medication
(I) told the patient to stay off Effexor… I wanted to be on the safe side… 
(I) wanted to make sure it was not an activation syndrome, which I have 
seen before. Physician #3.
Continued
7
Nguyen KA, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e052401. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052401
Open access
Patient communication was an important activity that 
HCPs used, in some cases, to initiate shared decision- 
making with the patient about the new medication action 
and plan. After the new action was taken to mitigate the 
ADR, the HCP would follow- up and monitor the new action 
and plan with patients. HCPs used various strategies to 
monitor and follow- up with patients, such as ordering a 
new lab test, or examining the patient at the next visit, 
to ensure that the ADR concern was resolved. Finally, if 
the ADR was confirmed during the investigation stage, 
several HCPs reported documenting the ADR in the EHR 
to help prevent recurrence. HCPs also followed up with 
other HCPs, to confirm that the ADR was correctly docu-
mented in the EHR if they did not input it directly.
It is important to recognise that the decision- making 
steps in stage 4, plan, action and follow- up, are iterative 
steps. If a certain plan and action did not resolve the 
suspected ADR, HCPs described developing a new plan 
and action until the problem is resolved.
DISCUSSION
To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine the 
cognitive processes of HCPs when they detect and solve 
potential ADR incidents. Our study explored the iterative 
steps of HCPs' decision- making, from detection of poten-
tial ADR incidents to plans and actions they took to resolve 
incidents. The study illustrates the cognitive complexity 
of the work conducted by HCPs when resolving ADR 
problems. Our findings point to four important implica-
tions, discussed below, to develop novel clinical decision 
support systems that more closely align with HCPs' cogni-
tive workflow.
Develop technologies to facilitate communication between 
HCPs and patients regarding ADRs
Detecting potential ADRs requires identifying patients' 
signs or symptoms that may be related to a drug. 20 For 
ADR alerts to work more efficiently, EHR systems could 
collect reliable information about patients' signs and 
symptoms, and then display and communicate that infor-
mation. Therefore, patient- generated data, which is not 
a typical element of many current alerting systems, may 
play an important role in future decision support for 
ADRs.21 Additionally, communication between HCPs and 
patients also plays an important role in resolving ADRs 
that are already occurring. In some cases, HCPs may help 
the patient set realistic expectations about the type and 
severity of symptoms. Throughout the course of ADR 
investigation and treatment, HCPs need to communi-
cate closely with the patient, to share potential risks and 
benefits and engage patients in a shared decision- making 
process.22 The study by Topaz et al demonstrated that 
HCPs were more likely to override an alert for medications 
that patients are currently tolerating or have previously 
tolerated.23 Indeed, communicating with patients about 
symptoms, medical history, and so on, is an important 
element in HCPs' decision- making. Such communica-
tion may occur not only through direct patient interac-
tions but also indirectly through patient portals, secure 
messaging and other telehealth technologies. 24 These 
modalities may also increase patients' access to care, facil-
itating patient- HCP communication to resolve ADRs.
Incorporate confirmatory and disconfirmatory ADR cues into 
alerting systems
Rapid, accurate and complete information is important 
to help detect and resolve ADR problems. Our study 
found that additional information on ADR detection, 
such as the confirmatory cues and disconfirmatory 
cues, were important to assist HCPs with the ADR inves-
tigation process. HCPs used these cues to organise and 
assemble a constellation of information in a form that is 
meaningful for sensemaking. This concept is known as 
knowledge- base cognitive mode. 25 Subsequently, EHR 
alerts systems for ADRs should align with a knowledge- 
base cognitive mode by including important cues while 
filtering distracting information to optimally help HCPs 
with clinical decision- making. Since ADR alerts detect 
potential ADRs from symptoms and abnormal lab results, 
confirmatory and disconfirmatory cues provided by the 
alerts could allow HCPs to confirm the alerts' trustwor -
thiness and avoid overlooking alerts. In fact, a study on 
drug allergy alert- overrides showed that providers were 
more likely to override alerts derived from non- important 
cues.23 Our findings, in combination with those results, 
highlight the importance of providing cognitive cues to 
assist HCPs with decision- making.
Box 1 Continued
I alerted the patient’s primary care provider ((PCP)) and the PCP discon-
tinued the varenicline. Pharmacist #2
Delayed start of bivalirudin until 3 days days later because patient had 
had an ablation procedure, ((so I)) felt patient’s risk of bleeding was 
higher. Pharmacist #3
Patient communication
(I) encouraged ((the)) patient to titrate up on gabapentin, as previously 
planned… I also try and address issues with diabetic socks/shoes so 
the patient does not perseverate. I discussed with patient and under -
scored the need for regular use of capsaicin, ((including)) how it works 
and why we use it. Physician #2
Follow- up and monitoring patients
At the patient’s next routine nursing visit, ((the)) nurse asked me to meet 
with the patient again. I briefly examined the patient and he had no 
signs of an allergic reaction. Physician #4
Documenting the ADR in the EHR
(I) entered nightmares for varenicline into the ((EHR)) allergy section. 
I was adding it to his allergies so no one would reorder it ((again)). 
Pharmacist #2
ADR, adverse drug reaction; ALT, alamine aminotransferase; EHR, elec-
tronic health record.
Themes (bolded) and quotes (italicised) are organised based on the four 
stages of the ADR decision making model (figure 2). The numbers for 
each participant map to the incident descriptions in table 2.
8
Nguyen KA, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e052401. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052401
Open access 
Design alert systems that account for negative cues
The absence of certain cues, known as negative cues, is 
another important factor for decision- making. HCPs are 
aware of this absence of information based on familiar 
perceptual patterns. For example, one experienced 
provider in our study described how s/he confirmed that 
a patient did not have a myocardial infarction (table 2, 
case B7). Although the patient reported a burning chest 
sensation, the patient did not have other symptoms such 
as numb fingers, arm pain or diaphoresis. The absence 
of the companion symptoms was reassuring, allowing the 
provider to focus on other potential causes of the symp-
toms, such as a potential ADR with abiraterone. This type 
of negative cue is often overlooked in technology- centric 
design but is a critical component of decision- making, 
especially during the evaluation of potential ADRs. 
Complex algorithm development that includes negative 
cues could advance decision support and help HCPs 
better detect and investigate potential ADRs.
Advance alert information to better support HCPs' risk-benefit 
evaluation
Our ADR decision- making model (figure 2) underscores 
that even when an ADR is confirmed, HCPs still need 
to evaluate the medication’s risks and benefits. Existing 
medication alert systems identify potential problems but 
the information they provide is often insufficient to help 
HCPs weigh risks and benefits of the problematic medi-
cation. As a result, HCPs seek information from drug 
references, colleagues and other sources. Indeed, ADR 
alert design without consideration of risks versus bene-
fits is likely to ‘fail’ (be overridden) in many instances. 
For complex risk- benefit evaluation, ADR alerts should 
provide quick access to a comprehensive list of risks and 
benefits, or corresponding sections of drug information 
resources, to help HCPs make a sound clinical decision.13
This study has several limitations. First, we interviewed 
only physicians and pharmacists regarding ADRs, since inci-
dent submissions from nurse practitioners were low. Nurse 
practitioners, registered nurses and physician assistants, 
also interact with patients and play important roles in ADR 
decision- making, warranting further research. Second, 
we were not able to directly compare the decision- making 
processes of physicians and pharmacists, because the varia-
tion in incidents precluded direct comparisons (eg, involved 
different medications or patients with varying medical condi-
tions). Third, we examined incidents from a single large 
Veteran Affairs Medical Center and EHR system. Our findings 
might not always apply to other settings. Fourth, all incidents 
collected and analysed were voluntarily provided by HCPs. 
This could influence our findings, because HCPs might be 
more inclined to submit incidents for which they felt most 
confident in their handling of the ADR; thus, incidents that 
created even greater challenges or uncertainty for HCPs as 
they resolved ADRs may have not have been captured. Fifth, 
most incidents we studied, especially those from physicians, 
were obtained from outpatient care. Thus, our results might 
not always apply to inpatient settings. Finally, we were not able 
to fully incorporate two incidents (box 1, Physician #8 and 
Pharmacist #10) into our decision- making model. Unlike 
other incidents, these two incidents focused on prevention 
of an ADR instead of resolving suspected ADRs. Further 
research is needed on HCPs' decision- making with respect to 
ADR prevention.
Our study findings have several practical applications. 
The ADR decision- making model we developed through 
this research has important implications for the design of 
clinical decision support. This model could be used as the 
foundation for a novel ADR alert system to support HCPs in 
recognising and resolving ADRs. Evolving alert systems by 
applying this model is anticipated to increase the cognitive 
support of alerts for HCPs, which subsequently can improve 
medication safety outcomes for patients. In addition, the 
ADR decision- making model is expected to be valuable for 
teaching medical and pharmacy trainees about the decision- 
making process for ADR mitigation.
CONCLUSION
This is likely the first study to identify the decision- making 
processes of HCPs when they detect and resolve potential 
ADR incidents. The ADR decision- making model developed 
from this study consists of four important stages: problem 
detection, investigating the cause of the problem, consider-
ation of risks and benefits, and plan, action and follow- up. This 
model is expected to be valuable for alert system designers 
as well as educators who are training future physicians and 
pharmacists about ADR decision- making. Our findings have 
four key implications for clinical decision support systems: 
develop technologies to facilitate communication between 
HCPs and patients to better detect and address ADRs; incor-
porate confirmatory and disconfirmatory cues into ADR 
alerting systems to more closely align with cognitive strate-
gies from HCPs; design alert systems that account for nega-
tive cues to further facilitate decision making; and enhance 
alert system displays to better support HCPs' risk- benefit 
evaluation process for ADRs. The design of supporting tech-
nologies for potential ADR problems should align with the 
real- world cognitive strategies of HCPs in order to achieve the 
best health outcomes for patients.
Author affiliations
1Center for Health Information and Communication, Richard L Roudebush VA 
Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA
2Department of Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, University of Florida 
College of Pharmacy, Gainesville, Florida, USA
3Applied Decision Science, LLC, Dayton, Ohio, USA
4Richard L Roudebush VA Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA
5VA Health Services Research and Development Center on Implementing Evidence- 
Based Practice, Roudebush VA Medical Center, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA
6Pharmacy Benefits Management Services, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare 
System, Los Angeles, California, USA
7Department of Pharmacy Practice, Purdue University, College of Pharmacy, West 
Lafayette, Indiana, USA
8Regenstrief Institute Inc, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA
Acknowledgements The authors thank the study participants for making this 
work possible. The authors also thank Rachel Dismore, Zamal Franks, Amy Brandt, 
9
Nguyen KA, et al. BMJ Open 2022;12:e052401. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052401
Open access
Linda Collins and Steven Sanchez for assistance with procedures, and Rachel 
Dismore for her assistance with participant recruitment and incident card collection.
Contributors KAN is responsible for the overall content as guarantor. ALR- J wrote 
the funded grant proposal (VA HSR&D CDA 11- 214), with input from PAG, LGM and 
MW. All authors (ALR- J, LGM, KJA, PAG, AJZ, MW), except AI and KAN, participated 
in study planning meetings and contributed to the design of the larger study. LGM 
trained ALR- J on cognitive task analysis and the critical incident technique. ALR- J 
conducted all cognitive task analysis interviews. ALR- J and AI analysed interview 
transcripts to develop a decision requirements table for each incident. KAN and 
LGM analysed decision requirements tables to identify emergent themes across 
incidents, under the mentorship of ALR- J, KAN drafted the journal manuscript. 
All authors reviewed and made important scientific edits to the manuscript and 
approved it for submission.
Funding This work was supported by VA HSR&D Career Development 
Award 11–214 (PI: ALR- J) along with the Centre for Health Information and 
Communication, Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration, 
Health Services Research and Development Service, CIN 13–416 (PI: MW). MW is 
Chief of Health Services Research and Development at the Richard L Roudebush 
Veterans Affairs Medical Centre in Indianapolis, Indiana, USA. Manuscript writing 
was supported in part by VA IIR 16–297. KAN was funded in part by the VA 
Postdoctoral Associated Health Fellowship Programme in Medical Informatics, VA 
Office of Education, HFP 04–148.
Disclaimer Views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the views of the Department of Veterans Affairs or the U.S. 
government.
Competing interests LGM is co- owner of Applied Decision Science, LLC, a 
company that studies decision making in complex environments and utilises the 
critical decision method. She aided in the design of the cognitive task analysis 
approach used in this study and trained the interviewer. MW has stock in Allscripts 
and Express Scripts Holding Company. All other authors report they have no 
conflicts of interest.
Patient consent for publication Not applicable.
Ethics approval This study involves human participants and was approved by the 
Indiana University IRB (protocol 1301010433).
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data availability statement Data are available upon reasonable request. Data 
from this study will be available upon reasonable request.
Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has 
not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been 
peer- reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those 
of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and 
responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content 
includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability 
of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, 
terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error 
and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.
Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY- NC 4.0) license, which 
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non- commercially, 
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is 
properly cited, appropriate credit is given, any changes made indicated, and the use 
is non- commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
ORCID iD
Khoa Anh Nguyen http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0096-0293
REFERENCES
 1 Weiss AJ, Elixhauser A. Characteristics of Adverse Drug Events 
Originating During the Hospital Stay, 2011: Statistical Brief #164, 
in Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP) Statistical Briefs. 
Rockville (M.D.): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (U.S.), 
2006.
 2 Harris Y , Hu DJ, Lee C, et al. Advancing medication safety: 
establishing a national action plan for adverse drug event prevention. 
Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2015;41:351–60.
 3 Schatz SN, Weber RJ, Reactions AD. Adverse drug reactions, 2015. 
Available: https://www.accp.com/docs/bookstore/psap/2015B2. 
SampleChapter.pdf [Accessed 1 Jun 2019].
 4 Edwards IR, Aronson JK. Adverse drug reactions: definitions, 
diagnosis, and management. Lancet 2000;356:1255–9.
 5 Meyboom RH, Egberts AC, Gribnau FW, et al. Pharmacovigilance in 
perspective. Drug Saf 1999;21:429–47.
 6 Chapman AB, Peterson KS, Alba PR, et al. Detecting adverse 
drug events with rapidly trained classification models. Drug Saf 
2019;42:147–56.
 7 Minhaj FS, Rappaport SH, Foster J, et al. Predictors of serious 
Opioid- Related adverse drug events in hospitalized patients. J 
Patient Saf 2021;17:e1585–8.
 8 Ramsey A, Sheikh A. Innovations in health care delivery: drug allergy. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2019;7:2143–50.
 9 Lintern G, Motavalli A. Healthcare information systems: the cognitive 
challenge. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 2018;18:3.
 10 Russ AL, Zillich AJ, Melton BL, et al. Applying human factors 
principles to alert design increases efficiency and reduces 
prescribing errors in a scenario- based simulation. J Am Med Inform 
Assoc 2014;21:e287–96.
 11 Russ AL, Weiner M, Saleem JJ, et al. When 'technically preventable' 
alerts occur, the design--not the prescriber--has failed. J Am Med 
Inform Assoc 2012;19:1119.1–1119.
 12 Dopp AR, Parisi KE, Munson SA, et al. A glossary of user- centered 
design strategies for implementation experts. Transl Behav Med 
2019;9:1057–64.
 13 Militelo LG, Klein G. Decision- centered design. The Oxford Handbook 
of cognitive engineering. Oxford handbooks, 2013: 267–71.
 14 Patel VL, Yoskowitz NA, Arocha JF , et al. Cognitive and learning 
sciences in biomedical and health instructional design: a review 
with lessons for biomedical informatics education. J Biomed Inform 
2009;42:176–97.
 15 Russ AL, Militello LG, Glassman PA, et al. Adapting cognitive task 
analysis to investigate clinical decision making and medication safety 
incidents. J Patient Saf 2019;15:191–7.
 16 Elkhadragy N, Ifeachor AP , Diiulio JB, et al. Medication decision- 
making for patients with renal insufficiency in inpatient and outpatient 
care at a US Veterans Affairs medical centre: a qualitative, cognitive 
task analysis. BMJ Open 2019;9:e027439.
 17 Crandall B, Klein G, Hoffman R. Working Minds: A Practitioner’s 
Guide to Cognitive Task Analysis, 2006.
 18 Geiselman RE, Fisher RP , MacKinnon DP , et al. Eyewitness memory 
enhancement in the police interview: cognitive retrieval mnemonics 
versus hypnosis. J Appl Psychol 1985;70:401–12.
 19 Ward P , Schraagen JM, Gore J. Incident- Based methods for studying 
expertise. Oxford University Press, 2019.
 20 Liu F , Jagannatha A, Yu H. Towards drug safety surveillance and 
pharmacovigilance: current progress in detecting medication and 
adverse drug events from electronic health records. Drug Saf 
2019;42:95–7.
 21 Islind AS, Lindroth T, Lundin J, et al. Shift in translations: data 
work with patient- generated health data in clinical practice. Health 
Informatics J 2019;25:577–86.
 22 Barry MJ, Edgman- Levitan S. Shared decision making--pinnacle of 
patient- centered care. N Engl J Med 2012;366:780–1.
 23 Topaz M, Seger DL, Slight SP , et al. Rising drug allergy alert 
overrides in electronic health records: an observational retrospective 
study of a decade of experience. J Am Med Inform Assoc 
2016;23:601–8.
 24 Jungwirth D, Haluza D. Information and communication technology 
and the future of healthcare: results of a multi- scenario Delphi survey. 
Health Informatics J 2019;25:161–73.
 25 Rasmussen J. Information Processing and Human- Machine 
Interaction. In: An approach to cognitive engineering. Elsevier 
Science Inc, 1986.